docs: add release process (#1150)
falcosecurity/falco: RELEASE.md

# Falco Release Process

> Our release process is mostly automated, but we still need some manual steps to initiate and complete it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Our release process is mostly automated, but we still need some manual steps to initiate and complete it.
```

Changes and new features are grouped in [milestones](https://github.com/falcosecurity/falco/milestones), the milestone with the next version represents what is going to be released. 

> Releases happen on a monthly cadence, and we need to assign owners for each (usually we pair a new person with an experienced one). Assignees and the due date are proposed during the [weekly community call](https://github.com/falcosecurity/community). Note that hotfix releases can happen as soon as it is needed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Releases happen on a monthly cadence, towards the 16th of the on-going month, and we need to assign owners for each (usually we pair a new person with an experienced one). Assignees and the due date are proposed during the [weekly community call](https://github.com/falcosecurity/community). Note that hotfix releases can happen as soon as it is needed.
```

Finally, on the proposed due date the assignees for the upcoming release proceed with the processes described below.

## Pre-Release Checklist

### 1. Release notes
- Let `YYYY-MM-DD` the day before of the [latest release](https://github.com/falcosecurity/falco/releases)

> - Every merged PR matching the `is:pr is:merged closed:>YYY-MM-DD` [filters](https://github.com/falcosecurity/falco/pulls?q=is%3Apr+is%3Amerged+closed%3A%3EYYYY-MM-DD) to be manually checked for release notes 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Check the release note block of every PR matching the `is:pr is:merged closed:>YYY-MM-DD` [filter](https://github.com/falcosecurity/falco/pulls?q=is%3Apr+is%3Amerged+closed%3A%3EYYYY-MM-DD)
```

>     - Release note must follow the [commit convention](https://github.com/falcosecurity/falco/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md#commit-convention)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Ensure the release note block follows the [commit convention](https://github.com/falcosecurity/falco/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md#commit-convention), otherwise fix its content
```

>     - If the merged PR has no target milestone, assign it to the current milestone it

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - If the PR has no milestone, assign it to the milestone currently undergoing release
```

> - Check issue with no milestone `is:pr is:merged no:milestone closed:>YYYT-MM-DD` and add it

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Check issues without a milestone (using [is:pr is:merged no:milestone closed:>YYYT-MM-DD](https://github.com/falcosecurity/falco/pulls?q=is%3Apr+is%3Amerged+no%3Amilestone+closed%3A%3EYYYT-MM-DD) filter) and add them to the milestone currently undergoing release
```

- Double-check that there are no more merged PRs without the target milestone assigned with the `is:pr is:merged no:milestone closed:>YYYT-MM-DD` [filters](https://github.com/falcosecurity/falco/pulls?q=is%3Apr+is%3Amerged+no%3Amilestone+closed%3A%3EYYYT-MM-DD), if any, fix them

### 2. Milestones

> - Move the [tasks not completed](https://github.com/falcosecurity/falco/pulls?q=is%3Apr+is%3Aopen) to the new milestone

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Move the [tasks not completed](https://github.com/falcosecurity/falco/pulls?q=is%3Apr+is%3Aopen) to a new minor milestone
```

- Close the completed milestone
    
### 3. Release PR

> - Double-check if any hard-coded version number is present in the code, it should be not present anywhere:

Reviewer: ```suggestion

- Double-check if any hard-coded version number is present in the code, it should be not present anywhere:
```

    - If any, manually correct it then open an issue to automate version number bumping later
    - Versions table in the `README.md` update itself automatically

>     - [leo] This step is no longer necessary when we remove `integrations/` directory

Reviewer: I propose to /hold this PR until #1145

Author: ```suggestion
```
Although I agree for waiting until #1145 is done, leaving the manual check in order to discover mistakes that might happen in the future.
That being said, if you think it's unnecessary, feel free to get rid of that

> - Generate the change log https://github.com/leodido/rn2md

Reviewer: Do we want to move that tool to falcosecurity/test-infra maybe?

Author: It would be great!
Let me know if I could help with it.

Reviewer 2: I've got a webpage up with the content of this that updates every 5 minutes.

Maybe we can just use that?

https://fs.fntlnz.wtf/falco/milestones-changelog.txt

    - [leo/lore] gotta move this (and merge it with Lorenzo's one) into test-infra
- Add the lastest changes on top the previous `CHANGELOG.md`
- Submit a PR with the above modifications
- Await PR approval

## Release

> Let `x.y.z` the new version.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Let `x.y.z` the new version.
```

### 1. Create a tag

> - Once the release PR has got merged, and the CI has done its job on the master, git tag the new release

Reviewer: ```suggestion

- Once the release PR has got merged, and the CI has done its job on the master, git tag the new release
```

```
    git pull
    git checkout master
    git tag x.y.z
    git push origin x.y.z
```

> **N.B.**: do NOT use an annotated tag

- Wait for the CI to complete

### 2. Update the GitHub release
- [Draft a new release](https://github.com/falcosecurity/falco/releases/new)
- Use `x.y.z` both as tag version and release title
- Use the following template to fill the release description:

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

<!-- Copy the relevant part of the changelog here -->

### Statistics

| Merged PRs        | Number  |
|-------------------|---------|
| Not user-facing   | x       |
| Release note      | x       |
| Total             | x       |

<!-- Calculate stats and fill the above table -->
```

> - Finally, publish the release!

Reviewer: ```suggestion

- Finally, publish the release!
```

## Post-Release tasks

### 1. Update the web site

> - TODO [Netlify](https://app.netlify.com/sites/falcosecurity/deploys)

Reviewer: We could remove this step completely if we add a CI scheduled job (CircleCI or GH action?) to run the website build daily.

Author: If it's not important to update the website before announcing the release, I definitely agree. 
Please let me understand if you have thought already about how to implement that, otherwise I will dig into it.

Author: I opened https://github.com/falcosecurity/falco-website/issues/188 for this.
Moreover, considering that not strictly connected with the release process, I will just remove the step from the doc.

### 2. Announce the new release to the world!

> - Send an announcement to cncf-falco-dev@lists.cncf.io

Reviewer: ```suggestion

- Send an announcement to cncf-falco-dev@lists.cncf.io
```

    - If the PR has no milestone, assign it to the milestone currently undergoing release
- Check issues without a milestone (using [is:pr is:merged no:milestone closed:>YYYT-MM-DD](https://github.com/falcosecurity/falco/pulls?q=is%3Apr+is%3Amerged+no%3Amilestone+closed%3A%3EYYYT-MM-DD) filter) and add them to the milestone currently undergoing release
- Double-check that there are no more merged PRs without the target milestone assigned with the `is:pr is:merged no:milestone closed:>YYYT-MM-DD` [filters](https://github.com/falcosecurity/falco/pulls?q=is%3Apr+is%3Amerged+no%3Amilestone+closed%3A%3EYYYT-MM-DD), if any, fix them

### 2. Milestones
- Move the [tasks not completed](https://github.com/falcosecurity/falco/pulls?q=is%3Apr+is%3Aopen) to a new minor milestone
- Close the completed milestone
    
### 3. Release PR

- Double-check if any hard-coded version number is present in the code, it should be not present anywhere:
    - If any, manually correct it then open an issue to automate version number bumping later
    - Versions table in the `README.md` update itself automatically
- Generate the change log https://github.com/leodido/rn2md

>     - [leo/lore] gotta move this (and merge it with Lorenzo's one) into test-infra

Reviewer 2: I think we want to remove this

- Add the lastest changes on top the previous `CHANGELOG.md`
- Submit a PR with the above modifications
- Await PR approval

## Release

Let `x.y.z` the new version.

### 1. Create a tag

- Once the release PR has got merged, and the CI has done its job on the master, git tag the new release

    ```
    git pull
    git checkout master
    git tag x.y.z
    git push origin x.y.z
    ```

> **N.B.**: do NOT use an annotated tag

- Wait for the CI to complete

### 2. Update the GitHub release
- [Draft a new release](https://github.com/falcosecurity/falco/releases/new)
- Use `x.y.z` both as tag version and release title
- Use the following template to fill the release description:
    ```
    <!-- Copy the relevant part of the changelog here -->

    ### Statistics

    | Merged PRs        | Number  |
    |-------------------|---------|
    | Not user-facing   | x       |
    | Release note      | x       |
    | Total             | x       |

    <!-- Calculate stats and fill the above table -->
    ```

- Finally, publish the release!

## Post-Release tasks

Announce the new release to the world!

> - Send an announcement to cncf-falco-dev@lists.cncf.io

Reviewer 2: I would add a note here to make sure that whoever sends this send it in plain text.

Author: done
